---
layout: post
title: "chan chan: A Weird Observer Implementation in Golang"
date: 2016-06-06 21:32:00 -0500
comments: true
categories: programming tutorial golang
---
There are many ways to implement a form of the Observer pattern in Go. This is one of them. It's
also probably not the best, but I thought it would be interesting to post it as I haven't seen many
like it around. (probably for a reason? lol.)

So, a few weeks ago I made a simple excercise with asynchronous messaging for my Component-Based
Software Development course. The goal was to study the basics of integration between bounded
contexts, and that included handling some events emitted by one of them.

To show you what this all is, we'll work with a simple program. It will listen for requests to
`/tic` and will return `toc` every 10 seconds to every pending request.

Let's start where the spark is born, in the `main` function:

```go
// main.go
package main

import (
  "log"

  "github.com/castillobg/chan-chan/api"
  "github.com/castillobg/chan-chan/core"
)

func main() {
  listeners := make(chan chan string)
  port := 8080

  core.Start(listeners)
  log.Printf("Tic, toc, tic, toc. Listening on %d", port)
  api.Listen(8080, listeners)
}
```

Here, the `api` package and something called `core` were introduced. And they both receive
`listeners`, a `chan` of `chans` of `string` (from now on, a "chan chan"), as an argument for their
`Listen` and `Start` functions... That's weird, innit? Let's see what they do.

```go
// api/api.go
package api

import (
  "fmt"
  "log"
  "net/http"
)

func Listen(port int, listeners chan<- chan string) {
  http.HandleFunc("/tic", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    log.Println("Received a tic")

    message := make(chan string)
    listeners <- message
    w.Write([]byte(<-message))
  })

  http.ListenAndServe(fmt.Sprintf(":%d", port), nil)
}
```

This is the `Listen` function in the `api` package. For each request to /tic, a new `chan string`,
is sent through `listeners`, through which the handler func will be notified when the next 10
seconds event happens. The package responsible for counting seconds and notifying every
`chan string` that it received through the chan chan it was passed:

```go
// core/core.go
package core

import (
  "log"
  "sync"
  "time"
)

type pending struct {
  sync.Mutex
  queue []chan string
}

func Start(listeners <-chan chan string) {
  p := new(pending)

  go func() {
    c := time.Tick(time.Duration(10) * time.Second)
    for range c {
      p.Lock()
      for _, listener := range p.queue {
        log.Println("Sending a toc")
        listener <- "toc"
      }

      if len(p.queue) > 0 {
        p.queue = make([]chan string, 0)
      }
      p.Unlock()
    }
  }()

  go func() {
    for listener := range listeners {
      p.Lock()
      p.queue = append(p.queue, listener)
      p.Unlock()
    }
  }()
}
```

There seems to be a lot going on here, but it's really simple. As I said before, `core` is
responsible for listening to new events and notifying the registered listening `chan string`s when
they happen. First, we need something to store the pending listeners. That's what `pending` is for.
It has a `[]chan string` called `queue` where we'll enqueue new listeners. Because incoming
requests are concurrent, it also "inherits" (sorry for using that word) behavior from `sync.Mutex`,
which allows us to lock the queue, and preventing inconsistencies.

Then we have the `Start` function, which inits a new `pending` and spawns two goroutines. The first
one starts a `time.Tick` which sends an event through a channel (`c`) every 10 seconds. It then
listens to those ticks and sends a `toc` to every listener in our queue. Then, the queue is reset.

The second goroutine waits for incoming listeners and adds them to the queue.

We can start our small server with `go run main.go` and send a request right away: `curl
localhost:8080/tic`. After 8 seconds or so (depending on how much time passed until you sent the
request), we get a `toc` back.

That's it! This is a weird way of implementing listeners. So far, I like it because it works well
for simple needs, and you don't need to add interfaces or `Listener` types. That said, it's not like
that's hell to implement. Mostly, I just thought this was a cool quirky thing and felt like sharing
to see what you thought. The comments are there, so troll away!
