---
layout: post
title: "GOtcha"
date: 2016-09-02 21:32:00 -0500
categories: tutorial programming golang
---

_The time has come for another post about Go gotchas! If you haven't, go check the previous post
about
[weird concurrency range behaviors](http://blog.castillobg.co/programming/tutorial/golang/2016/03/31/range-captured-vars.html).
Or don't. Whatever >:C_

Go has a relatively straightforward way of working with pointers: there's no
[pointer arithmetic](http://courses.washington.edu/css342/zander/css332/pointerarith.html), just the
`*` and `&` operator, to reference and dereference stuff, respectively. The language also doesn't
make it _that_ easy to create a pointer to a pointer, as there is no such thing as `**` (there are
ways to work around that, but it's not as simple as `**`!). This is all for a good reason, and it's
that it's reasonably difficult to reason about pointers some times.

However, Go isn't free of pointer confusion, and we'll take a look at how pointer receivers can give
you nightmares.

Anyone who's done basic Go stuff has, at some point, crossed paths with method receivers. In case
you need a refresher, they look like this:

```go
type potato struct {
    kind string
}

// potato is the method receiver!
func (p potato) setKind(kind string) {
    p.kind = kind
}
```
In this case, Potato is the method receiver, so we can call `setKind` on any variable of type
`potato`:

```go
//...
p := potato{"Stuffed"}
p.setKind("Baked")
//...
```

BUT! If we were to print `p`'s `kind`, we wouldn't get `Baked`!

```go
fmt.Println(p.kind)
// => Stuffed
```

That's because the receiver is passed by value, not reference. Go makes a copy of the value on which
the method is called, and uses that copy inside the method. When we get out of the method's
scope, we're back to the original value with its original fields.

To be able to modify the original struct's fields, we'd have to change the method to have a pointer
receiver.

```go
// Now *potato is the method receiver!
func (p *potato) setKind(kind string) {
    p.kind = kind
} 
```

_Also notice that now calling `setKind` on a simple `potato` (not a pointer to `potato`) won't work,
as `potato` and `*potato` are fundamentally different types._

If we print the value after calling `setKind`, we'd now get the new value:

```go
//...
p := &potato{"Stuffed"}
p.setKind("Baked")
fmt.Println(p.kind)
// => Baked
```

So far so good! However, all this talk is making me sick of potatoes. I wanna make them disappear!
Let's add a method for that.

```go
func (p *potato) disappear(){
    p = nil
}
``` 

Ah, a fine function if I ever saw one. By setting the pointer to the potato to `nil`, we can make it
stop existing forever! Let's give it a try:

```go
// ...
p := &{"Fried"}
// Ugh, no more potatoes, please. Outta my sight!
p.disappear()
// Surely that oughta teach them.
fmt.printf("%v\n", p)
// => &{"Fried"}
```

WHAT?!

Is that a zombie potato? Are we going nuts?

Turns out a pointer receiver is a copy of the actual pointer! So setting it to `nil` will only take
effect within the function's scope. Or, in the words of The Go Programming Language, by Alan A. A.
Donovan and Brian W. Kernighan:

> However, as with ordinary functions, any changes a method makes to the reference itself, like
> setting it to nil or making it refer to a different map data structure, will not be reflected in
> the caller.